---
layout: post
title: ec09bot, the time-waster Python IRC bot (and what it taught me)
tags: [irc bot, python, twitter]
---

One of the things I like the most about vacation is having the time and disposition to code weird/silly/funny ideas, which I would never bother with if it weren't for the fact that I've been having 16 free hours every day.

It is with that spirit that, once I learned that a few friends of mine (the geekiest, of course) had created an IRC channel, I came up with the idea of coding a bot.

Not a useful bot. Not even a smart bot. Just a funny bot.

To me, creating an IRC bot sounds like one of these things every hacker must absolutely do once, so the task was somewhat charmful. And as with almost every other pet project/prototype of mine, I decided to use Python for extra coolness.

After a little research, I came across <a href="http://python-irclib.sourceforge.net/" title="python-irclib">python-irclib</a>, which provides a framework for developing IRC bots. Yay, just what I needed, specially since I had spent most of the afternoon of the previous day just to get to know the IRC protocol and hand-code a vegetative-state bot that was pretty much only capable of keeping itself alive by replying to PINGs from the server. Lesson learned for code reuse.

The first command to be implemented was <em>!batima</em>, which makes the bot reply with a quote from <em>Feira da Fruta</em>, a classic trashy humor redub of an episode of the Batman series of the 1960s.

The implementation sounded pretty straightforward: given a list of such quotes, pick one at random and send it to the channel. The problem lied exactly in finding the list of quotes, which neither I nor any of my friends wanted to maintain.

Luckily over the years that redub has flocked a cult of fans, and there's even a <a href="http://twitter.com/#!/falasdobatima" title="Falas do Bátima">Twitter account</a> dedicated to posting almost daily quotes from the video, all-caps for extra trashiness I presume. With some help from <a href="http://code.google.com/p/python-twitter/" title="python-twitter">python-twitter</a>, the rest was quite easy.

<del>And along came <em>!chuck</em>, which yields a Chuck Norris Fact taken from another twitter account.</del> Update: The account in question seems to have been disabled. I'll probably re-implement the command as a fortune command.

Then came the fortune-based commands, suggested by <a href="http://twitter.com/ivansichmann" title="Ivan">Ivan</a>. What better repository of funny/interesting/nonsensic quotes than the one used by the fortune Unix command? By implementing the generic functionality of grabbing a fortune cookie and sending it to the channel, we soon had Calvin &amp; Hobbes, Futurama and even <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BOFH" title="Bastard Operator from Hell on Wikipedia">BOFH</a> quotes at our disposal.

And then there's the cool hack used for <em>!wikipedia</em>, which accesses <a href="http://dgl.cx/wikipedia-dns" title="Wikipedia Over DNS">Wikipedia Over DNS</a> using <a href="http://www.dnspython.org/" title="dnspython">dnspython</a> to grab article summaries from our favorite encyclopedia.

I tried to keep the general structure of the code very modular with regard to adding/removing commands. Basically, each command is implemented as a separate module, and registered to a dispatcher class which resides in the main file, <em>ec09bot.py</em>. The command registration code is somewhat facilitated by not having the main file import all command modules; instead, they are grouped in a single Python package. This design was somewhat inspired by the http package on newer Python versions.

All in all, between new Python modules and a few design techniques, I have learned quite a bit in doing this. It has been quite fun as well. The <a href="http://github.com/guilherme-pg/ec09bot" title="ec09bot">code of the bot</a> is on Github under the MIT license, anyone is welcome to try it.

